README.md, before:

[![Contributor Covenant](https://img.shields.io/badge/Contributor%20Covenant-2.1-4baaaa.svg)](.github/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Cubtera version release](https://github.com/cubtera/cubtera/actions/workflows/release_please.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/cubtera/cubtera/actions/workflows/release_please.yaml)
# Cubtera
## Multi-dimensional infrastructure manager

Cli tool for multi-layer and multi-dimension infrastructures management.

### Install
MacOS and Linux:
```bash
brew tap cubtera/cubtera
brew install cubtera
```
or download binary from [releases](https://ginhub.com/cubtera/cubtera/releases) and put it to your PATH.

Configure cli with [config file](.github/docs/config.md) or with [environment variables](.github/docs/config.md#environment-variables).

### Features
- [Units management](.github/docs/unit.md): the same IaC code module (tf, otf, bash, etc.) runs with different dimensions values
- [Inventory management](.github/docs/im.md): manage your inventory content with CLI commands
- [Runners plugins](.github/docs/runners.md): run your units with different runners (terraform, bash, etc.)
- [Inventory API server](.github/docs/api.md): using MongoDB storage (read-only)
- [Unit's deployment logging](.github/docs/dlog.md): log, view and monitor your deployments (BOM)
- support of local files and/or DB storage for dimension's inventory persistence
- docker image for live API service
- GH action for units runs in CI pipelines (WIP)

## How it works

Cubtera is a tool for managing IaC units with different dimensions from single inventory. It allows you to separate your infrastructure by different dimensions, and manage it with single inventory without code duplication (DRY).

Each unit is a separate bunch of code for chosen type of runner, such as terraform or bash script, which could be applied with defined set of dimensions. 
Dedicated dimension is a set of values, which could be used for infrastructure separation by different environments, regions, accounts, etc.

For example, you have a unit `aws_network_vpc` which is creating vpc network for your infrastructure, and you want to use it for different environments, like staging and production. You can create dimension, `dc` (data center), and inside this dimension folder create two files `staging.json` and `production.json` with the same set of variables, but with different values. 
production.json
```json
{ 
  "account_id": "123456789012",
  "cidr_block": "10.0.0.0/16",
  "availability_zones": ["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b", "us-east-1c"]
}
```
staging.json
```json
{ 
  "account_id": "9834895838923",
  "cidr_block": "10.100.0.0/16",
  "availability_zones": ["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b"]
}
```
And use this dimension to create vpc network for your staging and production environments, with the same terraform unit, but with different values for variables. 
```bash
cubtera run -d dc:production -u aws_network_vpc -- init
cubtera run -d dc:production -u aws_network_vpc -- plan
cubtera run -d dc:production -u aws_network_vpc -- apply
```
Your vpc network will be created in production environment with values from `production.json` file. Defined values will be provided to terraform unit as variables:
- `var.dim_dc_meta` - object from `production.json` file
- `var.dim_dc_name` - string `production

Cubtera takes responsibility for providing these variables to your terraform unit, and you can use them in your terraform code as any other variables.

### What is Terraform Unit?
Every terraform `unit` should be placed in separate folder in `inventory_path` folder, and should contain `main.tf` file with terraform code, and `unit_manifest.json` file with unit configuration. Folder name will be used as unit name.
Unit manifest file should contain following fields:
- `dimensions` - required dimensions which are required to apply this unit (required)
- `optDims` - optional dimensions which could be used to apply this unit (optional)
- `allowList` - allowed dimensions which could be used to apply this unit (optional)
- `denyList` - denied dimensions which could not be used to apply this unit (optional)
- `type` - unit type, which will define which runner be used to run this unit (required). Currently supported types are `tf` and `bash`.
- `runner` - runner settings section (optional):
  - `runner.bin_path` - path to runner script or binary, which will be used to run this unit (optional). If not set, will be used default runner for this type.
  - `runner.version` - version of runner, which will be used to run this unit (optional). If not set, will be used `latest` version of runner for this type or default version from config.
  - 
- `spec` - unit specification:
  - `spec.envVars` - environment variables which will be used to apply this unit (optional)
    - `spec.envVars.optional` - optional environment variables which could be used to apply this unit
    - `spec.envVars.required` - required environment variables which are required to apply this unit
  - `spec.files` - files which will be used to apply this unit (optional)
    - `spec.files.optional` - optional files which could be used to apply this unit
    - `spec.files.required` - required files which are required to apply this unit

### What is Dimension?

Dimension is a set of values, which could be used for infrastructure separation. 
Every dimension type represented by separate folder in org inventory and configured by `config.toml`
*Dimension type* value is a folder name.

Each *dimension name* could be represented by set of files in dimension type folder starting with `<dimension_name>`, and separated with `:`.
Required file is `<dimension_name>.json`, which contains dimension values. If you want to add additional logic for your dimension, you can add `<dimension_name>:<any_name>.json`.

Values from `<dimension_name>.json` file will be provided to terraform unit as tf variable with name `dim_<dimension_type>_meta`, as object from json file.

Values from `<dimension_name>:<any_name>.json` file will be provided to terraform unit as tf variable with name `var.dim_<dimension_type>_<any_name>`, as object from manifest json file.

### What is Dimension Type?
Dimension type is a set of dimensions, which could be used for infrastructure separation.

<!-- Every dimension entry is represented with three separate files, which are:
- `<dimension_name>.json` - dimension values file (required)
- `<dimension_name>:manifest.json` - dimension manifest file (optional), could be used for ownership separation or other purposes
- `<dimension_name>:defaults.json` - dimension defaults file (optional), could be used to set default values for dimension -->

Every *dimension type* set of dimensions should be placed as separate files in `inventory_path/dimensions/<dimension_type>` folder, and should contain `<dimension_name>.json` file for each. 
File name will be used as `dimension name`, folder name will be used as `dimension type`.

Dimension json files could contain any json data, which will be provided to any terraform unit, started with this dimension name, as variables:
- Data from `dimension_name.json` will be provided with `dim_<dimension_type>_meta` variable in terraform unit, as object from json file
- Data from `dimension_name:manifest.json` will be provided with `var.dim_<dimension_type>_manifest` variable in terraform unit, as object from manifest json file
- Data from `dimension_name:defaults.json` will be provided with `var.dim_<dimension_type>_defaults` variable in terraform unit, as object from defaults json file
- `dimension_name` will be provided with `var.dim_<dimension_type>_name` variable in terraform unit, as string

Commit message:

doc: update documentation (#18)
* test action

* update README.md

---------

Co-authored-by: Kaladin <onpalm@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

[![Contributor Covenant](https://img.shields.io/badge/Contributor%20Covenant-2.1-4baaaa.svg)](.github/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Cubtera version release](https://github.com/cubtera/cubtera/actions/workflows/release_please.yaml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/cubtera/cubtera/actions/workflows/release_please.yaml)
# Cubtera
## Multi-dimensional infrastructure manager

Cli tool for multi-layer and multi-dimension infrastructures management.

### Install
MacOS and Linux:
```bash
brew tap cubtera/cubtera
brew install cubtera
```
or download binary from [releases](https://ginhub.com/cubtera/cubtera/releases) and put it to your PATH.

Configure cli with [config file](.github/docs/config.md) or with [environment variables](.github/docs/config.md#environment-variables).

## Core Concepts

### Dimensions

Cubtera uses the concept of "dimensions" to organize and manage infrastructure. Dimensions can represent any logical grouping or layer of your infrastructure. Examples include:

- Cloud accounts (e.g., management, production, staging)
- Environments (e.g., dev, test, staging, production)
- Data centers (e.g., different regions or types of data centers related to one env)
- Applications (e.g., different applications or services with the same flows)
- And more (user-definable: databases, storages, domains, etc.)

Dimensions could be hierarchical and can have parent-child relationships, as well as flat dimensions with no relationships.

### Participants

Each dimension type can have multiple "participants," which are specific instances or configurations within that dimension. Participants are defined in JSON files and stored in the inventory.

### Units

Units are the smallest operational entities in Cubtera, representing specific scripts or actions that can be performed on your infrastructure by different tools like Terraform, Opentofu, Bash Scripts, Helm,  etc. 
Units are stored in the inventory and can be run with different dimensions values and using cubtera variables defined in the inventory and named following simple convention.

### Features
- [Units management](.github/docs/unit.md): the same IaC code module (tf, otf, bash, etc.) runs with different dimensions values
- [Inventory management](.github/docs/im.md): manage your inventory content with CLI commands
- [Runners plugins](.github/docs/runners.md): run your units with different runners (terraform, bash, etc.)
- [Inventory API server](.github/docs/api.md): using MongoDB storage (read-only)
- [Unit's deployment logging](.github/docs/dlog.md): log, view and monitor your deployments (BOM)
- support of local files and/or DB storage for dimension's inventory persistence
- docker image for live API service
- GH action for units runs in CI pipelines (WIP)

## How it works

Cubtera is a tool for managing IaC units with different dimensions from single inventory. It allows you to separate your infrastructure by different dimensions, and manage it with single inventory without code duplication (DRY).

Each unit is a separate bunch of code for chosen type of runner, such as terraform or bash script, which could be applied with defined set of dimensions. 
Dedicated dimension is a set of values, which could be used for infrastructure separation by different environments, regions, accounts, etc.

For example, you have a unit `aws_network_vpc` which is creating vpc network for your infrastructure, and you want to use it for different environments, like staging and production. You can create dimension, `dc` (data center), and inside this dimension folder create two files `staging.json` and `production.json` with the same set of variables, but with different values. 
production.json
```json
{ 
  "account_id": "123456789012",
  "cidr_block": "10.0.0.0/16",
  "availability_zones": ["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b", "us-east-1c"]
}
```
staging.json
```json
{ 
  "account_id": "9834895838923",
  "cidr_block": "10.100.0.0/16",
  "availability_zones": ["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b"]
}
```
And use this dimension to create vpc network for your staging and production environments, with the same terraform unit, but with different values for variables. 
```bash
cubtera run -d dc:production -u aws_network_vpc -- init
cubtera run -d dc:production -u aws_network_vpc -- plan
cubtera run -d dc:production -u aws_network_vpc -- apply
```
Your vpc network will be created in production environment with values from `production.json` file. Defined values will be provided to terraform unit as variables:
- `var.dim_dc_meta` - object from `production.json` file
- `var.dim_dc_name` - string `production

Cubtera takes responsibility for providing these variables to your terraform unit, and you can use them in your terraform code as any other variables.

### What is Terraform Unit?
Every terraform `unit` should be placed in separate folder in `inventory_path` folder, and should contain `main.tf` file with terraform code, and `unit_manifest.json` file with unit configuration. Folder name will be used as unit name.
Unit manifest file should contain following fields:
- `dimensions` - required dimensions which are required to apply this unit (required)
- `optDims` - optional dimensions which could be used to apply this unit (optional)
- `allowList` - allowed dimensions which could be used to apply this unit (optional)
- `denyList` - denied dimensions which could not be used to apply this unit (optional)
- `type` - unit type, which will define which runner be used to run this unit (required). Currently supported types are `tf` and `bash`.
- `runner` - runner settings section (optional):
  - `runner.bin_path` - path to runner script or binary, which will be used to run this unit (optional). If not set, will be used default runner for this type.
  - `runner.version` - version of runner, which will be used to run this unit (optional). If not set, will be used `latest` version of runner for this type or default version from config.
  - 
- `spec` - unit specification:
  - `spec.envVars` - environment variables which will be used to apply this unit (optional)
    - `spec.envVars.optional` - optional environment variables which could be used to apply this unit
    - `spec.envVars.required` - required environment variables which are required to apply this unit
  - `spec.files` - files which will be used to apply this unit (optional)
    - `spec.files.optional` - optional files which could be used to apply this unit
    - `spec.files.required` - required files which are required to apply this unit

### What is Dimension?

Dimension is a set of values, which could be used for infrastructure separation. 
Every dimension type represented by separate folder in org inventory and configured by `config.toml`
*Dimension type* value is a folder name.

Each *dimension name* could be represented by set of files in dimension type folder starting with `<dimension_name>`, and separated with `:`.
Required file is `<dimension_name>.json`, which contains dimension values. If you want to add additional logic for your dimension, you can add `<dimension_name>:<any_name>.json`.

Values from `<dimension_name>.json` file will be provided to terraform unit as tf variable with name `dim_<dimension_type>_meta`, as object from json file.

Values from `<dimension_name>:<any_name>.json` file will be provided to terraform unit as tf variable with name `var.dim_<dimension_type>_<any_name>`, as object from manifest json file.

### What is Dimension Type?
Dimension type is a set of dimensions, which could be used for infrastructure separation.

<!-- Every dimension entry is represented with three separate files, which are:
- `<dimension_name>.json` - dimension values file (required)
- `<dimension_name>:manifest.json` - dimension manifest file (optional), could be used for ownership separation or other purposes
- `<dimension_name>:defaults.json` - dimension defaults file (optional), could be used to set default values for dimension -->

Every *dimension type* set of dimensions should be placed as separate files in `inventory_path/dimensions/<dimension_type>` folder, and should contain `<dimension_name>.json` file for each. 
File name will be used as `dimension name`, folder name will be used as `dimension type`.

Dimension json files could contain any json data, which will be provided to any terraform unit, started with this dimension name, as variables:
- Data from `dimension_name.json` will be provided with `dim_<dimension_type>_meta` variable in terraform unit, as object from json file
- Data from `dimension_name:manifest.json` will be provided with `var.dim_<dimension_type>_manifest` variable in terraform unit, as object from manifest json file
- Data from `dimension_name:defaults.json` will be provided with `var.dim_<dimension_type>_defaults` variable in terraform unit, as object from defaults json file
- `dimension_name` will be provided with `var.dim_<dimension_type>_name` variable in terraform unit, as string
